What it Takes to Reach the Goal
===============================

*By Ajahn Piak. An interview with a senior disciple of Ajahn Chah
conducted by Ajahn Chandako.*

During the first few years of his monastic career, a young monk’s
training is divided between Wat Pah Nanachat and other branch
monasteries of Wat Pah Pong. One of the disciples of Ajahn Chah who has
helped to train Wat Pah Nanachat monks is Tan Ajahn Piak, abbot of Wat
Pah Cittabhāvanā, a branch monastery situated to the north of Bangkok.
The following conversation with Tan Chandako took place in 1998.

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: The *Kruba Ajahns* rarely say anything directly about
Nibbāna because it is beyond a normal person’s realm of possible
experience. Even if the people listening believe the explanation, it
still doesn’t actually help them much, and if they don’t believe it they
may make a lot of bad *kamma* for themselves. So the *Kruba Ajahns*
usually refer to it using metaphors or refuse to speak of it at all,
only teaching the path to get there.

The important thing is to keep going straight without stopping. For
example, say you want to go to Fa Kram Village over there; if you follow
the path and keep walking you’ll get there in a short time. If you stop
to take a look at something and then chat with people, then go off with
them to see something else, it will take a long time before you reach Fa
Kram, if ever. But the reality is that almost everybody gets sidetracked
or at least stuck in *samādhi*, thinking that they’ve arrived already.
Even Luang Por Chah was stuck for a while; Tan Ajahn Mahā Boowa for six
years; Ajahn Tate for ten years; Ajahn Sot (Wat Pak Nam) for twenty
years.

*Tan Chandako*: Because to all intents and purposes it appears to be
full enlightenment?

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: Yes. There seem to be no *kilesas* whatsoever.
Everything is clear. Many people don’t make it past this stage. Other
people practice for five Rains Retreats, ten Rains Retreats, and still
feel they haven’t made much progress and get discouraged. But one has to
keep in mind that it is always only a very few people who have the
*pāramī* to reach the goal. Compare it with the US President or the Thai
King. Out of an entire nation of millions of people, only one person at
a time has the *pāramī* to be in the top position. You have to think in
terms of what you are going to do to set yourself above the crowd,
creating the causes and conditions for future liberation. Effort in the
practice is what makes the difference. There are thousands of monks in
Thailand who ordain with the sincere intention of realizing Nibbāna.
What sets people apart, why some succeed while others don’t, is mainly
due to their level of effort, as well as the effort they’ve put forth in
the past. A person has to train himself to the point where it becomes an
ingrained character trait to be continuously putting forth effort,
whether he’s around other people or alone. Some people are very diligent
as long as there is a teacher or other monks watching, but as soon as
they’re alone their effort slackens.

When I was a young monk and my body was strong, I’d stay up later than
everyone else walking *jongrom* and see the candles in the other *kuṭīs*
go out one by one. Then I’d get up before the others and watch the
candles gradually being lit. It wasn’t that I had it easy. The *kilesas*
in my heart were always trying to convince me to take a rest: ‘Everyone
else has crashed out. Why shouldn’t you do the same?’ The two voices in
my head would argue: ‘You’re tired. You need a rest. You’re too sleepy
to practice.’ ‘What are you going to do to overcome sleepiness? Keep
going.’ Sometimes the *kilesas* would win, but then I’d start again and
eventually they weakened.

*Tan Chandako*: It’s often when *samādhi* or *vipassanā* has been going
well that *kilesas* seem to arise the most. At such times it seems I’ve
got more *kilesas* than ever. Is that normal?

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: Very normal. The average person has a huge amount of
*kilesas*. Just to recognize that one has a lot of *kilesas* is already
a big step. Even the *sotāpanna* has many *kilesas* to become free from,
much work to be done. Even at that stage it’s not as if everything is
*sabai*. It’s as if there is a vast reservoir of *kilesas* below us
which gradually come to the surface, and it’s not easy to know how much
is remaining. Just when you think you’ve fully gone beyond a particular
*kilesa*, it will arise again. This happens over and over. The only
thing to do is to keep using *paññā* to keep pace with the *kilesas*,
meet and let go of them as they arise in the present.

*Tan Chandako*: Have you ever met or heard of anyone who has attained
*magga-phala* by only contemplating and not practising *samādhi*?

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: No, if you want a straight answer. *Samādhi* is
essential for the mind to have enough power to cut thoroughly through
the *kilesas*. However, if one is practising *vipassanā* with the
understanding and intention that it will lead to the development of
*samādhi* at a later stage, this is a valid way to go about it.

The character of almost all meditation monks, both Thais and those born
in Western countries, is such that they need to use a lot of *paññā*
right from the very beginning in order to gradually make their minds
peaceful enough to be able to develop *samādhi*. Only a very small
percentage of Thais, and possibly no Westerners, are the type to develop
*samādhi* fully before beginning *vipassanā*.

*Tan Chandako*: Can it be said how deep and strong *samādhi* must be in
order to attain *magga-phala*?

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: It must be strong enough to be still and unified as
one, without any thinking whatsoever. There will still be awareness –
knowing what one is experiencing.

*Tan Chandako*: According to whether one is in a remote location or in a
busy monastery, should one’s Dhamma practice change or remain the same?

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: Dhamma practice takes on a different character if you
are in the city or are busy with duties in a monastery. In the forest
there are few external distractions and it is easy to make the mind
peaceful. If you have many sense contacts and dealings with other
people, it is essential to figure out how not to pick up other people’s
emotional vibes (*arom*). Otherwise what happens is that the people
around us feel lighter, while we feel heavier and heavier. It’s
necessary to be able to completely drop mental engagement as soon as
interactions with other people have finished. Otherwise all the
conversations and emotions of the day are floating around in the *citta*
when one goes to sit in meditation.

It’s easy to say, ‘Just be mindful’ and ‘Don’t pick up other people’s
baggage’, but it is very difficult to do. Luang Por Chah could take on
the problems and sufferings of others without picking up any of them
himself, because his *citta* was very strong. The people around him
didn’t know what was happening. They just knew that they felt cool and
happy around Luang Por. But this is not a practice for beginners. Most
people just get burned out.

Practising in the forest is easier, and I recommend that you should try
as much as possible not to get involved with too many responsibilities,
especially being an abbot. If someone tries to tell you that you are
selfish and should be helping others, reflect that this is due in large
part to the conditioning from Western society. If the Buddha had thought
that way, we never would have had a Buddha. In order to put your mind at
rest, reflect on the goodness you’ve done and rejoice in the *pāramī*
that you’re creating. Those who try to help others too much before
they’ve helped themselves will never be able to teach or help beyond the
superficial. If their teachings mislead others due to their own
ignorance, they can make a lot of negative *kamma*. Many of the Wat Pah
Pong monks try to emulate Luang Por in his later years, when he would
talk with people all day, rather than his early years of difficult
practice. But it was precisely those years in the forest that made Luang
Por into the great teacher that he was.

*Tan Chandako*: Have you ever heard of anyone attaining *magga-phala* by
any means other than analyzing the body into its component parts and
elements?

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: No. At the very least, when the *citta* is clearly
known as *anattā*, the knowing mind will return to knowing the body
thoroughly as *anattā* as well.

*Tan Chandako*: In one of Luang Por Chah’s Dhamma talks he says that
even for *arahants* there are still *kilesas*, but like a bead of water
rolling off a lotus petal: nothing sticks. How do you understand this?

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: Luang Por liked to use language in unconventional ways
in order to get people’s attention and make them think. What he was
referring to was the body – the result of previous *kamma* – but the
*citta* was completely devoid of *kilesas*. Normally people use other
terms to refer to the body and the physical *dukkha* of an *arahant*,
but Luang Por was quite creative in his use of the convention of
language.

*Tan Chandako*: I’ve heard that while still a student, before you’d met
Luang Por Chah, you had a vision of him.

*Tan Ajahn Piak*: That’s right. I’d intended to return, [to New York, to
finish a master’s degree in business management] but soon after I’d
begun to meditate I had a clear vision of a monk whom I didn’t
recognize, chewing betel nut. I went to see many of the famous *Kruba
Ajahns* at that time – Luang Por Fun, Luang Por Waen – but when I met
Luang Por Chah I recognized him from the vision and figured that he
would be my teacher.

When I began to consider ordaining instead of completing my studies, my
family tried hard to dissuade me, but I found meditation so peaceful
that everything else felt like *dukkha*.

The Authors
-----------

Tan Ajahn Piak still lives in his monastery to the north of Bangkok. Any
fields surrounding it are long gone and now the Bangkok suburban sprawl
has engulfed Wat Pah Cittabhāvanā. The 2011 flooding saw the monastery
submerged under a couple of metres of water. However, Ajahn Piak still
provides a refuge for those seeking the Buddha’s path. His reputation as
a meditation teacher has grown, and his emphasis on combining the
cultivation of *samādhi* with staying up all night brings many people to
practice under him. Despite poor health he has begun travelling and
teaching abroad in recent years, most notably in Malaysia, Singapore,
Australia and New Zealand.

Tan Chandako carried on training in Thailand under various teachers, and
also spent periods of time in Perth, living in Bodhiñāṇa Monastery. He
spent a year in Wat Pah Nanachat as Vice-Abbot in 2002, before seeking a
place to settle down. A Rains Retreat in the Czech Republic led to his
return to Australia and finally to Auckland, New Zealand, where in 2004
he was invited by the ABTA (Auckland Theravāda Buddhist Association) to
establish a monastic residence on their recently-acquired property not
too far from the city. Thus Vimutti Monastery was born, and an extensive
programme of tree-planting and construction has been under way since
then. Additional land has been purchased to provide something of a
buffer zone.

As well as his responsibility for running the monastery, Ajahn Chandako
provides regular teaching and retreats both at the monastery and in
various other parts of New Zealand. Every year he comes to Thailand and
visits his home in the US, where he also conducts retreats.
